---
title: What are the differences between SQL and NoSQL?
author: Steve Haines
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=302
categories:
  - Uncategorized

---
If you are planning a new data driven project, you might be wondering what are the differences between SQL and NoSQL? In this blog, I&#8217;m going to explore a few different scenarios I think lend themselves to each of these two database &#8216;types&#8217;.

### What is a database?

Both of these systems are types of databases with &#8216;SQL&#8217; better known as a &#8216;Relational Database&#8217; and NoSQL known as a &#8216;Document Database&#8217;, Wikipedia&#8217;s definition of a database is as follows:

<blockquote class="wp-block-quote">
  <p>
    <em>&#8220;An organized collection of </em><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_(computing)"><em>data</em></a><em>, generally stored and accessed electronically from a computer system&#8221;</em>
  </p>

  <cite><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database">Wikipedia </a>(Retrieved 23/04/2019 12:47PM)</cite>
</blockquote>

This definition seems simple enough, and it is simple at this level. A slightly more detailed definition of a database might be some computer software that allows you to perform what are called &#8216;[CRUD Operations&#8217;:][1] 

  1. **Create** data in the database when a real world event happens, 
  2. **Read** it back over time
  3. **Update** it when the situation changes
  4. **Delete** it when the situation expires or is not relevant anymore. 

So what happens as your database grows and complex relationships between the data begin to emerge? How you express these relationships is one of the key ways SQL (i.e. relational databases) and NoSQL (i.e. document databases) differ. 

### Schema

One of the key reasons NoSQL databases are starting to gain a lot of traction recently is actually more to do with economics than anything. In a world where CPU speeds and bandwidth are ever-increasing, relational databases would have no problem scaling to meet the needs of Big Data. The reason NoSQL has been gaining traction is because we don&#8217;t live in that world any more. individual CPU speeds have plateaued over the last 10 years or so and we are not seeing the same exponential growth rates that we were seeing in the late 80s and early 90s. This has led those processing massive data sets to search for new ways to achieve their goals. Instead of _scaling up_ as it&#8217;s known, (e.g. making the computer you are running your database on more powerful) power users are instead looking for databases that support features that allow them to _scale out_ instead clustering instances and concepts such as sharding.

Some examples of databases that are built to work in this kind of way are MongoDB, mariaDB

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Create,_read,_update_and_delete