---
title: 'Querying files directly using SQL: Introduction to query engines.'
author: Steve Haines
type: post
date: -001-11-30T00:00:00+00:00
draft: true
url: /?p=273
featured_image: https://storage.googleapis.com/wordpress-sqlsteve/2019/04/dremel-1568x1173.jpg
categories:
  - Discussion
tags:
  - Apache
  - BigQuery
  - Dremel
  - Drill
  - Facebook
  - Google
  - Presto
  - Query Engine

---
I have recently been experimenting with a relatively new class of tools loosely called &#8216;query engines&#8217;. These tools enable you to use many of the features of databases with a much smaller investment in time/skills. These are relatively new entrants to the data world, all having been released in the last 5 years. These tools can help with tasks such as querying files directly using SQL, enabling you to act on any issues quickly and without ETL.

The three tools I will be discussing are:

  * **[Dremel][1]** (Proprietary, built by Google in 2010, now integrated into [Google BigQuery][2])
  * **[Presto][3]** ( open source, built by Facebook in 2013, now part of the Apache ecosystem)
  * **[Drill][4]** (open source, inspired by/improved version of Dremel, part of Apache ecosystem)

### High speed data access

It is said that a Dremel (the tool) can cut through virtually anything due to it&#8217;s extremely high velocity spinning blade and I guess the developers at Google are alluding to the same concept. These tools, just like their namesakes are supposed to give you high speed access to fresh data insights as quickly as they are occurring.

The key strength of these tools is that a single query can combine data from multiple different sources. This could mean that you can join unstructured data to structured data or anything in between.

### What makes these tools different

All of these engines share a few things in common:

  * Distributed computing model
  * Optimised for high speed when querying huge data sets.
  * ANSI SQL interaction layer
  * Gives access to data stored in: Hadoop, Cloud Storage, RDBMS, NoSQL
  * Drivers / APIs allowing interoperability with analytics platforms

It&#8217;s important to understand that while these tools allow the user to write a SQL query and execute it, there is actually no physical database here in the traditional sense of the word. The way these queries are being executed is by translating your SQL query into an execution plan specific to the type of file you are querying. So how do you go about querying files directly using SQL? For the purposes of this blog post I will try using the following UI wrappers for each of the engines:

  * [Dremio][5], which is an open-source UI wrapper for Drill.
  * [Airpal][6], an open-source UI wrapper for Presto.

### SaaS options&#8230;

I won&#8217;t be using Google BigQuery as part of this blog post as Drill itself is actually based on the query engine for BigQuery. I also wanted to focus more on the core technologies than individual proprietary implementations. If you are interested in SaaS versions of these technologies that you can use on a pay-as-you-go basis, I would look at the following from each of the major vendors:

  * [Google BigQuery][2] (based on Dremel)
  * [Amazon Athena][7] (based on Presto)
  * [Azure Data Lake Analytics][8] (has some similar functionality, not based on any discussed here)

I will use each of these tools locally on my laptop and query from my own filesystem rather than HDFS but both of the tools are also fully integrated with and perfectly complemented by a Hadoop setup.

&#8230;



For the puposes of this experiment I will be using the [Enron Corpus][9] data set released after the collapse of Enron Corporation in 2001. It&#8217;s a corpus of over 600,000 emails sent by Enron&#8217;s 158 employees. Since this data set was released and compiled it has become a stable feature in the data science community for new starters to explore a large corpus of real emails for the purposes of building various free text classification models.

 [1]: https://storage.googleapis.com/pub-tools-public-publication-data/pdf/36632.pdf
 [2]: https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/
 [3]: https://github.com/prestodb/presto
 [4]: https://drill.apache.org/
 [5]: https://www.dremio.com/
 [6]: https://airbnb.io/airpal/
 [7]: https://aws.amazon.com/athena/
 [8]: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/data-lake-analytics/
 [9]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enron_Corpus